document how to work with source-git (#135)
packit-service/packit.dev: content/docs/work-with-source-git.md

---
title: "Source-git"
date: 2020-06-25T23:59:59+01:00
draft: false
chapter: false
weight: 2
aliases:
- /source-git

> - /omfg

Reviewer: :see_no_evil: :hear_no_evil: :speak_no_evil:

Reviewer: I'm not sure these aliases are working... I cannot seem to get to this page when running the page locally with `make server`.

Author: yes, I spent like 30 minutes on that and finally figured it out, this line is just a leftover :D thanks for noticing

---

This document is focused on how packit treats a source-git repo.

In short, source-git concept is fairly simple - take an upstream repo and shove
downstream content on top of it. Easy right?

Packit is then able to work with such a repo and:

* Create SRPMs

* Sync the state into dist-git

* And you are able to utilize all features of packit-service: builds on PRs,
  tests on those builds, update your package in Fedora.

Let's describe all of these in detail.

> ### Upstream history or not

Reviewer: This should be improved, but atm I have no clue how.

Author: let's see what others on the team think

Reviewer 2: just the title or the section?

Author: I hope the whole section

Reviewer: Actually I was referring to the title only (that's why the comment was placed on this line, instead of being attached to all the lines in the section stuck_out_tongue): I find it unclear. By reading it even I have difficulties gaining a quick understanding what this section will be about, and I can imagine readers unfamiliar with the concept of source-git will be even more lost.

The key ingredient here is the config option `upstream_ref`. It tells packit
the git ref which is suppose to match the archive specified in the spec file.
All commits on top of this ref are treated either as:

* downstream patches
* downstream packaging

For downstream patches, packit creates a patch from git commits on top of
`upstream_ref`. Downstream packaging changes are ignored in patch files since
they can be directly committed to dist-git. You can control the ignore
mechanism with config option `patch_generation_ignore_paths`.

#### Example

Let's have a look at source-git repo for pacemaker package:
```
$ git log --online
bd12722 (HEAD -> c8s-test, origin/c8s-test, master) downstream packaging
7201e28 Refactor: controller: remove unused argument
91c557c Refactor: controller: convert active_op_t booleans to bitmask
2e90063 Refactor: controller: rename struct recurring_op_s to active_op_t
3ee90ce (tag: source-git-start) pacemaker-2.0.3 base
```

We have 5 commits:
* 3ee90ce - the bottom commit, equals to an unpackaed upstream tarball
* 2e90063 - a downstream patch
* 7201e28 - a downstream patch
* 91c557c - a downstream patch

> * bd12722 - top commit, contains a spec file so packit won't create a patch file out of this one

Reviewer: Probably would be more easy to read if these explanations would be in the same order as the commit list above.

packit.yaml has only two lines:
```
$ cat .packit.yaml
specfile_path: SPECS/pacemaker.spec
upstream_ref: source-git-start
```

As you can see, we are telling packit, that commit tagged as `source-git-start`
indicates the barrier between upstream and downstream, in our case it's just a
single commmit with the upstream archive content, but it could have been the
whole upstream git history.

### Adding changes

So, how can one add new changes into a source-git repo? That's simple - just
commit them. If your repo is on GitHub (or another public forge), you can even
force-push changes to achieve desired results with patches.

### Creating a SRPM

The format between a source-git repo and the build system is a source RPM,
SRPM. We can then take the file and build it locally, send it to koji or copr
and we would get the result we want - a list of binary RPMs created from the
SRPM.

In the end, you can create SRPM with packit's `srpm` command:
```
$ packit srpm
SRPM: /home/tt/p/c/s/pacemaker/pacemaker-2.0.3-6.gbd127227.fc32.src.rpm
```

#### How packit generates a SRPM from a source-git repo?

These are the steps:

> 1. Download archive specified in specfile's Source directive.

Reviewer: :thinking: Why not using the sources in the repo instead of downloading the archive?

Author: which sources?

Reviewer: The source code that is stored in the source-git repo.

Why is it needed to download the archive from some remote location, when the source-git repo already should have that content?

2. Process commits on top off `upstream_ref`.
3. Bump release in the spec file.
4. Generate new changelog entry in the spec file.
5. Run rpmbuild and set paths so that rpmbuild can find patches, spec files,
   archive and additional sources.

> ### Updating your package in Fedora

Reviewer: Maybe make it explicit in this chapter that this is the "sync to dist-git" part, as mentioned in the introduction part.

When you use source-git to track a package in Fedora, the workflow is the same as if you were in an upstream repository:
```
$ packit propose-update
```

> and that results in this PR: [src.fedoraproject.org/rpms/python-docker/pull-request/26](https://src.fedoraproject.org/rpms/python-docker/pull-request/26).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
which creates a PR similar to this: [src.fedoraproject.org/rpms/python-docker/pull-request/26](https://src.fedoraproject.org/rpms/python-docker/pull-request/26).
```

> If you are looking for the design concept of source-git, please head on here: [source-git/design]({{ ref "/docs/source-git/design" }})

Reviewer: Having this sentence as the second sentence in this document would make more sense I think.

---
title: "Working with source-git"
date: 2020-06-24T23:59:59+01:00
draft: false
disableToc: false
weight: 12
aliases:
- /source-git
---

This document is focused on how packit treats a source-git repo.

If you are looking for the design concept of source-git, please head on here:
[docs/source-git-design]({{< ref "/docs/source-git-design.md" >}})

In short, source-git concept is fairly simple - take an upstream repo and shove
downstream content on top of it. Easy right?

Packit is then able to work with such a repo and:

* Create SRPMs

* Sync the state into dist-git

* And you are able to utilize all features of packit-service: builds on PRs,
  tests on those builds, update your package in Fedora.

Let's describe all of these in detail.

### Upstream history or not

Your source-git repo can contain upstream git history if you want. Or it
doesn't. This is really up to you and packit is able to work with both.

The key ingredient here is the config option `upstream_ref`. It tells packit

> the git ref which is suppose to match the archive specified in the spec file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the git ref which is supposed to match the archive specified in the spec file.
```

All commits on top of this ref are treated either as:

* downstream patches
* downstream packaging

> For downstream patches, packit creates a patch from git commits on top of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For downstream patches, packit creates a patch for each commit on top of
```
or
```suggestion
For downstream patches, packit creates patches from git commits on top of
```

`upstream_ref`. Downstream packaging changes are ignored in patch files since
they can be directly committed to dist-git. You can control the ignore
mechanism with config option `patch_generation_ignore_paths`.

#### Example

Let's have a look at source-git repo for pacemaker package:
```
$ git log --online
bd12722 (HEAD -> c8s-test, origin/c8s-test, master) downstream packaging
7201e28 Refactor: controller: remove unused argument
91c557c Refactor: controller: convert active_op_t booleans to bitmask
2e90063 Refactor: controller: rename struct recurring_op_s to active_op_t
3ee90ce (tag: source-git-start) pacemaker-2.0.3 base
```

We have 5 commits:
* bd12722 - top commit, contains a spec file so packit won't create a patch file out of this one

> * 7201e28 - a downstream patch
> * 91c557c - a downstream patch
> * 2e90063 - a downstream patch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* 7201e28 - the 3rd downstream patch
* 91c557c - the 2nd downstream patch
* 2e90063 - the 1st downstream patch
```

* 3ee90ce - the bottom commit, equals to an unpackaed upstream tarball

packit.yaml has only two lines:
```
$ cat .packit.yaml
specfile_path: SPECS/pacemaker.spec
upstream_ref: source-git-start
```

As you can see, we are telling packit, that commit tagged as `source-git-start`
indicates the barrier between upstream and downstream, in our case it's just a
single commmit with the upstream archive content, but it could have been the
whole upstream git history.

### Adding changes

So, how can one add new changes into a source-git repo? That's simple - just
commit them. If your repo is on GitHub (or another public forge), you can even
force-push changes to achieve desired results with patches.

> The important point with patch files is, that a commit which changes code will be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The important point with patch files is that a commit which changes code will be:
```

Author: grammarly is fine w/ and w/o the comma

1. converted into a patch file (using `git format-patch`)

> 2. and added to the spec file

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. added to the spec file
```

Author: I'm sorry but I like mine more (even though it may not be so correct)

Reviewer: I'm mentioning it here, but probably we should adopt a documentation style guide for our projects. [Google has one](https://developers.google.com/style/tense), but then [here is a collection](https://www.writethedocs.org/guide/writing/style-guides/#selecting-a-good-style-guide-for-you) of them, which reveals, that [Red Hat also has one](https://stylepedia.net/style/).

I've added this as a discussion point for next Tuesday.

This comment is not a blocker for this PR.
